=encoding UTF-8
=head1 NAME

x0d.conf - configuration file to x0d, a high performance HTTP web server.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 # import some extensions
 import 'userdir';

 # setup handler, invoked on startup, to initialize the system
 handler setup {
     workers 2;
     userdir.name 'public_html';
     listen port: 8080, backlog: 128;
 }

 # main handler, invoked on every incoming request
 handler main {
     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     userdir;
     staticfile;
 }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The file I<x0d.conf> is used to configure B<x0d>.

=head1 SYNTAX

The configuration-language behind B<x0d> is L<flow(7)>, a sub-project of B<x0>.
Thus, the configuration file directly matches the B<Flow>-syntax.

B<Flow> is a handler-driven language. This means, that all you do is defining
handlers and their actions.

The actions can itself be passing control to another self defined handler
or a host-application defined handler.

For a detailed language documentation, please see the L<flow(7)> manual page.

=head2 HANDLERS

Handlers are meant to handle something. In B<x0d> these are incoming HTTP requests
being handled by the "main"-handler and and the setup handler,
which is to handle simply the setup stage and no requests
at all.

A handler may either actually process for what it's there for (an HTTP request)
and directly return to the host application, or it may fail to process the request,
and thus returns to its intermediate caller for further execution (e.g. trying other handlers).

Although, you cannot pass any parameters to handlers yourself.
If a handler calls another handler, the parameters (secretly) passed to the outer
handler will also (secretly) passed to the inner handler.
The I<secret> parameter passed to handlers is their context.
In our case, this is the HTTP request associated with our B<main>-handler and
to all descendent handlers being called from here.

The B<setup> handler has no context passed to it, and thus, will not serve any
requests but setup the HTTP server instead.

=head2 FUNCTIONS

Functions do something and - unlike handlers - do always return to their caller
and cannot be defined in your source configuration file. Functions are provided
by the runtime B<x0d> provides.
They are there to configure something, and thus, are most seen in the
B<setup>-handler, to start listening on a given TCP/IP port for example.

You are able to pass parameters to functions. What parameters these are,
is something you can read later in that page. Parameters are comma 
separated and parameters may be surrounded by round brackets.
So the following two lines are equally the same.

 listen address: 0.0.0.0, port: 80;

Is equal to

 listen(address: 0.0.0.0, port: 80);

However, you B<must> have passed the parameter separator (comma) at the end
of the first line if you want to split your function call across multiple lines,
or the B<flow>-parser will not be able to understand, that your function-call
continues on the next line, if -and only if- you have not used the round
brackets, like in the second example.

=head2 VARIABLES

You can declare variables in your handler, for later reference.

 var fnord = 42;

Variables are strongly typed, that is, that when you initially assign a value of
type "number" to your named variable, further re-assignments to that variable
must remain of that type "number."

Supported data types are:

=head1 CORE API

The core API covers all handlers, functions, and properties that do not require
additional plugins (extensions) to be loaded into the server.

=head2 SETUP PROPERTIES

=over 6

=item B<workers> (number)

Gets or sets the number of workers to be spawned.
Setting this value to 1 (default) will create no additional threads
except the already existing main thread.

=item B<workers> (array_of_numbers)

Passing an array of numbers will spawn as many workers as elements in that
array each worker associated with a processor affinity to
its related value in the array.

That is, when you use C<workers [0, 1, 4];> it will spawn three workers
with the first having a processor affinity of 0 (bound to CPU 0), the second
worker using the second processor (value 1) and the 3rd worker
using the fiths processor (value 4).

This is because you pass an index to the processor, if you have 4 CPUs (or cores)
available, then you may use values 0 to 3 to address them.

You should have at least as much workers as CPU cores available in your setup.

Example 1:

 handler setup {
    # ... (use 4 workers)
    workers 4;
 }

Example 2:
 handler setup {
     # ... (use 4 workers, each bound to its own distinct processor)
     workers [0, 1, 2, 3];
 }

Also assigning the worker's thread CPU affinity further helps reducing
the request processing latency.

=item B<mimetypes> (path)

Defines the file containing the mimetype mappings.

Example:

 handler setup {
    # ...
    mimetypes '/etc/mime.types';
 }

=item B<mimetypes.default> (mimetype)

Gets or sets the default mimetype to use.

=item B<etag.mtime> (boolean)

Gets or sets whether or not the mtime (last-modification time) should be
part of the ETag-field when generated.

=item B<etag.size> (boolean)

Gets or sets whether or not the file size should be
part of the ETag-field when generated.

=item B<etag.inode> (boolean)

Gets or sets whether or not the file's inode number should be
part of the ETag-field when generated.

This is generally not a good idea for cluster setups.

=item B<server.advertise> (boolean)

Gets or sets whether or not the server should propagate itself
via the Server response header.

=item B<server.tag> (array)

Sets the array of custom server advertisement tags to append to
the Server response header.

=item B<tcp_fin_timeout> (timeout)

Explicitely sets the TCP FIN timeout.

Default: 0 seconds (equivalent to using the system global default)

=item B<max_internal_redirect_count> (number)

Sets the number of maximum internal redirects that may occur.

Default: 3

=item B<max_read_idle> (timeout)

Gets or sets the connection read idle timeout value.

Default: 60 seconds

=item B<max_write_idle> (timeout)

Gets or sets the connection write idle timeout value.

Default: 60 seconds

=item B<max_keepalive_idle> (timeout)

Gets or sets the connection write keep-alive timeout value.

Default: 60 seconds

=item B<max_keepalive_requests> (number)

Gets or sets the number of requests (after the first, initial) allowed to accept
within a single connection.

Default: 100

=item B<max_request_uri_size> (size)

Gets or sets the number of bytes a request URI must fit into.

Default: 4096 byte

=item B<max_request_header_size> (size)

Gets or sets the number of bytes a single request header (name plus value) must fit into.

Default: 8192 byte

=item B<max_request_header_count> (number)

Gets or sets the maximum count of request headers a client request may sent.

Default: 100

=item B<max_request_body_size> (size)

Gets or sets the maximum number of bytes a request body must fit into.

Default: 4 mbyte

=item B<max_connections> (count)

Gets or sets the number of maximum connections the server will handle in parallel.

Default: 1000

=item B<max_files> (count)

Gets or sets the number of maximum files the server will have opened at the same time.

=item B<max_address_space> (size)

Gets or sets the memory allocation limit to this process.

=item B<max_core_size> (size)

Gets or sets the file size limit for possibly generated core files, which are
required to properly debug the process after it crashed.

=item B<request_header_buffer_size> (size)

Sets the size in bytes for the request headers (plus first line).
The request headers (plus first line) must fit into this buffer or
an HTTP error response 413 (Request Header Fields Too Large)
will be generated instead.

Default: 8 kbyte

=item B<request_body_buffer_size> (size)

Defines the size of the internal body buffer size. This does not constrain
the maximum request body size but sets a limit on how many bytes
may be read at most in order to hold the request body before it is processed.

Default: 8 kbyte

=item B<tcp_cork> (boolean)

Corks the response stream (see C<TCP_CORK> in tcp(7)) to improve throughput.

Default: false

=item B<tcp_nodelay> (boolean)

Gets or sets whether or not the request connection may enable the
C<TCP_NODELAY> flag.

C<TCP_NODELAY> is an operation-system flag that, if enabled (not default)
disables the Nagle-algorithm for data-transmission and instantly flushes
the data to the network, thus, even very small packets, which were put into
a single IP packet otherwise, will be sent each on its own.

Enabling C<tcp_nodelay> may result into poorer network throughput, and
thus, should be left disabled in most cases, except highly interactive
HTTP response streams..

Default: false

=item B<sys.cpu_count> ()

Retrieves the actual number of CPU cores on the current system.

Example:

 var num_cpus = sys.cpu_count()
 log.debug("CPU count: ${num_cpus}")

=back

=head2 SETUP FUNCTIONS

=over 6

=item B<listen> (address: IP = 0.0.0.0, port: number, backlog: number = 128, multi_accept: number = 1, reuse_addr: bool = false, reuse_port = false)

Configures a listener on given address and port.

The address parameter may be an IPv4 or IPv6 address.
Parameters with default values will be filled automatically with their respective default values.

Example 1:

 handler setup {
     # listen on IPv4 address 127.0.0.1 with port 8081
     listen address: 127.0.0.1, port: 8081;
 }

Example 2:

 handler setup {
     # listens on IPv6 address with port 8080
     listen address: fe80::2c0:26ff:fe85:b3, port: 8080;

     # listen on any IPv6 address with port 9090
     listen address: ::, port: 9090;
 }

=back

=head2 GLOBAL PROPERTIES

Global properties are available in setup and main handlers.

=over 6

=item B<sys.cwd>

Retrieves the current working directory.

=item B<sys.pid>

Retrieves the current process ID.

=item B<sys.now>

Retrieves the current time as a timestamp value.

=item B<sys.now_str>

Retrieves the current time as a formatted string value.

=back

=head2 GLOBAL FUNCTIONS

Global functions are available in setup and main handlers.

=over 6

=item B<error.page> (status, uri)

Defines an error page for the given response status code.

Example:

 setup {
   listen port: 8080;
   error.page 404, '/errors/404.html';
 }
 
 main {
   if req.path =^ '/errors/' {
     docroot '/var/www/error-pages';
     staticfile;
     return 500;
   }

   docroot '/var/www/htdocs';
   staticfile;
 }

=item B<log.err> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: error.

=item B<log.warn> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: warning.

=item B<log.notice> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: notice.

=item B<log.info> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: info.

=item B<log.diag> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: diag.

=item B<log.debug> (message)

Logs given message with logging severity: debug.

=item B<sys.env> (key)

Retrieves the value of an environment variable.

Example:

 sys.env("PATH")

=item B<sys.hostname> ()

Retrieves hosts hostname this process is running on.

Example:

 log.info("Running on: " + sys.hostname);

=item B<sleep> (seconds)

Sleeps for given request processing with the specified number of seconds.
This function is purely for demonstration use of showing how virtual-machine
suspend/resume is working in order to implement non-blocking synchronous calls.

It is highly discouraged for production use.

=item B<file.exists> (path)

Determines whether or not given filename path exists.

Example:

 if (file.exists("/etc/htpasswd")) {
     log.debug("File exists.")
 } else {
     log.debug("File does not exist.")
 }

=item B<file.is_reg> (path)

Determines whether or not given filename path exists as regular file.

Example:

 if (file.is_reg("/etc/htpasswd")) {
     log.debug("Regular file exists.")
 } else {
     log.debug("Regular file not exist.")
 }

=item B<file.is_dir> (path)

Determines whether or not given filename path exists as directory.

Example:

 if (file.is_dir("/etc/htpasswd.d")) {
     log.debug("Directory exists.")
 } else {
     log.debug("Directory does not exist.")
 }

=item B<file.is_exe> (path)

Determines whether or not given filename path exists as executable file.

Example:

 if (file.is_exe("/bin/bash")) {
     log.debug("Executable exists.")
 } else {
     log.debug("Executable does not exist.")
 }

=back

=head2 MAIN PROPERTIES

=over 6

=item B<req.accept_language(string[] supportedLanguages)>

Evaluates the B<Accept-Language> request header and matches it against the list of supported languages.
The supported language that is preferred by the client the most will be the result.
If no language matches, the first language from the list of supported languages will be the result instead.

Example:

 handler main {
   var lang = req.accept_language ['de', 'en', 'ja'];

   log.diag ("Preferred client language: '${lang}'");

   # ...
 }

=item B<req.method>

Retrieves the request method, e.g. GET, POST, etc.

=item B<req.url>

Retrieves the request URI.

=item B<req.path>

Retrieves the path part of the request URI.

=item B<req.header> (name)

Retrieves request header-value of a given header-name.

Example:

 if (req.header('X-Test') == '') {
     # ...
 }

=item B<req.cookie> (name)

Retrieves the value of the cookie with the given name or an empty string if not available.

Example:

 if (req.cookie('route') != '') {
     # ...
 } else {
     # ...
 }

=item B<req.host>

Retrieves the request hostname.

=item B<req.pathinfo>

Retrieves the computed pathinfo value

=item B<req.is_secure>

Retrieves a boolean value whether or not this connection is SSL enabled.

=item B<req.status>

Retrieves the request's response status code, if set already, or 0 otherwise.

=item B<req.remoteip>

Retrieves the remote (client) IP address.

=item B<req.remoteport>

Retrieves the remote (client) port number.

=item B<req.localip>

Retrieves the local (server) IP address the client connected to.

=item B<req.localport>

Retrieves the local (server) port number the client connected to.

=item B<phys.path>

Retrieves the mapped path to the physical file.

=item B<phys.is_reg>

Retrieves a boolean indicating whether or not the physical file is
a regular file or not.

=item B<phys.is_dir>

Retrieves a boolean indicating whether or not the physical file is
a directory or not.

=item B<phys.is_exe>

Retrieves a boolean indicating whether or not the physical file is an executable
(the executable-bit set in permissions).

=item B<phys.mtime>

Retrieves the last modification timestamp of the physical file.

=item B<phys.size>

Retrieves the file size of the physical file.

=item B<phys.etag>

Retrieves the computed ETag of the physical file.

=item B<phys.mimetype>

Retrieves the mimetype of the physical file.

Indicates whether or not the current connection's request is SSL secured or not.

=item B<regex.group> (position)

Retrieves the matched group of a regular expression match.

Example:

  # rewrites /assets/SOMETHING.css to /static/SOMETHING.css
  if (req.path =~ /^/assets/(.*\.css)$/) {
    rewrite "/static/${regex.group(1)}"
  }

=item B<docroot> (path)

Sets the requests document root to the given path.

Example:

 docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';

=back

=head2 MAIN FUNCTIONS

=over 6

=item B<error.handler> (proc)

Defines a handler to invoke when processing the request generated an HTTP error.

Example:

 handler custom_error {
     if req.path =^ '/static' {
         rewrite '/error.html'
         staticfile
     } else {
         director.fcgi address: 127.0.0.1, port: 7500;
     }
 }

 handler main {
     error.handler custom_error
     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs'
     staticfile
 }

=item B<autoindex> (array)

Remaps the current request to an index file as passed via arguments if the
current request's physical file points to a directory and this directory
contains a file listed in the array passed.

Example:

 handler main {
    # ...
    docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
    autoindex ['index.php', 'index.lua', 'index.html'];
    # ...
 }

=item B<alias> (prefix: string, target: string)

Aliases the given prefix with the matching part of the request path to the given
physical target.

Example:

 handler main {
     docroot "/var/www/localhost/htdocs";
     alias "/distfiles", "/usr/portage/distfiles";
     dirlisting;
     staticfile;
 }

This is equivalent to:

 handler main {
     if (req.path =^ '/distfiles') {
         docroot '/usr/portage/distfles';
     } else {
         docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     }
     dirlisting;
     staticfile;
 }

=item B<rewrite> (path)

Rewrites the current request to point to another physical file, without redirecting,
as if the client has requested another file.

 handler main {
     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     rewrite '/error.html' if req.path =^ '/something/else';
     staticfile;
 }

=item B<pathinfo> ()

Enforces computation of pathinfo.

=item B<header.add> (name, value)

Adds the given header to the list of response headers.

=item B<header.overwrite> (name, value)

Adds (possibly overwriting if already present) a response header.

=item B<header.append> (name, value)

Appends the given value to the already existing header.
If this header is not yet available, this method is equivalent to B<header.add>.

=item B<header.remove> (name)

Removes a header by given name from the response headers.

=back

=head1 MAIN HANDLERS

=over 6

=item B<staticfile> ()

Serves the mapped physical file to the client.

Example:

 handler main {
    # ...
    staticfile;
 }

=item B<precompressed> ()

This handler looks for a precompressed version of the requested
static file and will prefer this to compression-requesting clients
if and only if their mtime match.

Supported algorithms / file suffixes are gzip (.gz) and bzip2 (.bz2).

Example:

 handler main {
    # ...
    docroot "/var/www/localhost/htdocs";
    precompressed;
    staticfile;
 }

=item B<return> (code: int, url: string)

Redirects current request to another URL.

The redirect code must be between 300 and 308.

Example:

 handler main {
    # ...
    if (req.path == '/home') {
        return 301, 'http://xzero.io/';
    } else {
        return 302, '/home/local';
    }
 }

=item B<return> (http_code)

Generate a simple response to the current request.

Example:

 handler main {
    return 404 if req.path == '/favicon.ico';
    # ...
 }

=back

=head1 PLUGINS

B<x0> comes with a set of standard plugins extending the core
as described below:

=head2 status

=over 6

=item B<status.api> ()

is a handler that responds with the server status information in JSON format.

Example:

 handler main {
   match req.path {
     on '/status.json' {
       access.deny_except [127.0.0.1/8];
       status.api;
     }
     else {
       # ...
     }
   }
   # ...
 }

=item B<status> ()

is a handler that generates a server status page.

Example:

 status if req.path == '/server-status';

=item B<status.nginx_compat> ()

is a handler that generates a server status page
almost compatible to the one Nginx produces.

Example:

 status.nginx_compat if req.path == '/server-status';

=back

=head2 access

This plugin provides basic IP and CIDR network based access control.

=over 6

=item B<access.deny> ()

Deny every request that passes this handler.

=item B<access.deny> (remote_ip)

=item B<access.deny> (remote_cidr)

=item B<access.deny> (remote_cidr_array)

=item B<access.deny> (remote_ip_array)

Denies a single remote IP or every IP within a CIDR network either.
You can also specify an array of IPs or an array of CIDR networks to be denied.

Example:

 handler main {
   # denies every request coming from within this subnet
   access.deny 192.168.42.0/24;

   # denies every request coming from within this subnet
   access.deny [192.168.0.0/16, 10.0.0.0/8];

   # deny a single remote IP
   access.deny 10.26.91.1;

   # ...
 }

=item B<access.deny_except> (remote_ip)

=item B<access.deny_except> (remote_cidr)

=item B<access.deny_except> (remote_cidr_array)

=item B<access.deny_except> (remote_ip_array)

Denies every client except those specified. This is the exact opposite from the other B<access.deny>() family handlers.

Example:

 handler main {
   # denies every access to this site that comes not
   # from one of these 2 subnets.
   access.deny_except [10.26.91.0/24, 127.0.0.1];

   # ...
 }

=back

=head2 accesslog

This plugin provides functionality for logging handled requests.

You can define custom accesslog format strings within the setup handler.
If no custom handler is defined nor used, a default accesslog format (named "main") will be used.

There is also a pre-defined "combined" log format that is identically compatible
to the Apache's combined log format.

You can generally log into more than one log target, each with its own log formats.

=over 6

=item B<accesslog.format> (string id, string format)

is a setup function that defines a new accesslog format
to be later referenced by given id.

The accesslog format is a text string that can contain
substitution IDs (starting with a %-sign followed by the ID)
that will be replaced with their meaning during the logging phase.

Substitution IDs can be the following:

=over 9

=item B<%%>

a single % sign

=item B<%E<gt>{NAME}>

HTTP request header value

=item B<%E<lt>{NAME}>

HTTP response header value

=item B<%C{NAME}>

request cookie value

=item B<%c>

HTTP response status code

=item B<%l>

Remote logname as provided by identd, if available.
(Not implemented yet.)

=item B<%h>

Remote address

=item B<%i>

Number of bytes received from the client (transport level)

=item B<%m>

HTTP request method

=item B<%o>

Number of bytes trnasmitted (response body)

=item B<%O>

Number of bytes transmitted (trnasport level)

=item B<%p>

HTTP request path

=item B<%q>

HTTP request query

=item B<%q>

HTTP request query with leading B<?> if available, or an empty string.

=item B<%r>

HTTP request line

=item B<%t>

human readable timestamp

=item B<%T>

request time, the time in "seconds.milliseconds" it took to serve the request
from the first byte read to the last byte transmitted.

=item B<%u>

HTTP authenticated username

=item B<%U>

HTTP request path without query part

=item B<%v>

HTTP host header

=back

Example:

 handler setup {
   accesslog.format 'custom', "%c|%t|%T|%r|%v|%>{User-Agent}";
 }

 handler main {
   accesslog file: '/var/log/access.log', format: 'custom';
   # ...
 }

=item B<accesslog> (string file, string format = "main")

is a function to ensure the currently handled request is being
logged into the given logfile_path.

 handler main {
     accesslog '/var/log/x0d/access.log';

     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     staticfile;
 }

=item B<accesslog.syslog> (string format = "main")

is a function to ensure the currently handled request is being
logged into the local syslog.

 handler main {
     accesslog.syslog;

     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     staticfile;
 }

=back

=head2 auth

Adds support for HTTP Basic Authentication.

=over 6

=item B<auth.realm> (realm_string)

is a function, that assigns a realm title to the currently being processed
request.

 auth.realm "Secret Area";

=item B<auth.userfile> (htpasswd_filename_string)

is a function, that assigns a user database to this request, to check against.

 auth.userfile "/var/www/localhost/.htpasswd";

=item B<auth.pam> (service_name: string)

main function that tells the authentication underlying system to authenticate
the user based on a PAM service.

Example:

 handler main {
   # ...
   if req.path =^ '/secret' {
     auth.realm "Secret Area";
     auth.pam "www";
     auth.require;
     # ...
   }
   # ...
 }

=item B<auth.require> ()

is the handler, actually glueing everything together, demanding the
remote client to authenticate with username/password against the
previousely supplied userfile within the given realm.

 handler main {
     auth.realm "Secret Area";
     auth.userfile "/var/www/localhost/.htpasswd";
     auth.require;

     docroot "/var/www/localhost/htdocs";
     staticfile;
 }

=back

=head2 cgi

Adds support for CGI/1.1 scripts.

=over 6

=item B<cgi.max_scripts> (limit: int)

defines the maximum number of concurrently running CGI scripts allowed.

Default is 128.

Example:

 handler setup {
   # ...
   cgi.max_scripts 20;
 }

=item B<cgi.exec> ()

is a handler that tests whether the underlying physical file is a
regular executable file, which is then be invoked as the CGI/1.1 program.

Example (runs B<cgi.exec> on any request path that ends with C<.cgi>):

 cgi.exec if req.path =^ '/cgi-bin/';

=item B<cgi.run> (string executable)

is a handler that runs given executable on the given HTTP requests within
a CGI/1.1 environment.

 cgi.run "/usr/bin/php" if req.path =$ '.php';

=back

=head2 director

The director plugin implements advanced load balancing.

=over 6

=item B<director.load> (name: string, path: string)

Spawns a load balancer instance with the given name by loading its
configuration from a plain-text database file.

Thie file SHOULD NOT edited by hand, even though, it is possible, this
is not the way to edit the cluster. There is a JSON API for
manipulating these dynamic load balancers via the B<director.api>() handler.

Example:

 handler setup {
     # ...

     # loads the dynamic cluster with unique name 'app_cluster' from given file:
     director.load 'app_cluster', '/var/lib/x0/app_cluster.db';
 }
 
 handler main {
     # ...
     director.pass 'app_cluster';
 }

=item B<director.api> ()

A request handler, to provide the client with a JSON API to inspect
the current load balancer states, their statistics, as well as allowing
you to actually reconfigure specific backends.

Statically spawned clusters may only enable/disable backends,
but dynamically spawned clusters are capable of creating new backends,
reconfiguring them, and having them removed again.
Dynamic cluster configuration is also kept on local storage and is kept in
sync with the live configuration's changes.

 handler main {
     if req.path =^ '/x0' {
         director.api '/x0';
	   }

     # ...
 }

=item B<director.balance> (director_name: string, bucket_name: string = "")

Passes the request to the director by given name.
This is usually what you are to use in your configuration file.

You can optionally pass a bucket name if you partitioned your cluster into buckets.

Example:

 handler main {
     if (req.path =^ '/cart') {
         director.pass 'app_cluster', 'vip';
     } else {
         director.pass 'app_cluster';
     }
 }

=item B<director.pass> (director_name, backend_name)

Passes the request to a specific backend on the given director.

Use this to allow clients to decide (for example via cookie
or request-header) what backend is to serve that request,
which should help you testing code on a single backend before
rolling out the backend's code change on the full cluster.

If the specified backend is not available, a 503 (Service Unavailable)
response will be generated and an appropriate error message will be logged.

Please note, that explicitely specifying a backend does ignore
any configured capacity limits.

 handler main {
     director.pass 'app_cluster', req.cookie("X-Backend");
 }

=item B<director.fcgi> (address: IP, port: number, string: on_client_abort = "close")

Directly proxies a givenr equest to FastCGI backend application.

The parameter I<on_client_abort> defines how to proceed with the backend connection
when the client has aborted the connection to this server too early.
It can either directly close the connection to the backend server,
send a notification to the backend, that the client has aborted early, or
ignore the event, so that the backend does not notice whether or not the
client is still alive.

=item B<director.http> (address: IP, port: number, string: on_client_abort = "close")

Directly proxies a givenr equest to an HTTP backend application.

 handler main {
     docroot '/var/www/localhost/htdocs';
     staticfile if req.path =^ '/assets/';

     director.http address: 127.0.0.1, port: 8081;
 }

=item B<director.haproxy_monitor> (prefix: string = "/")

Handler that (if prefix matches the requests URI) serves an HAproxy compatible monitor page.

=item B<director.haproxy_stats> (prefix: string = "/")

Handler that (if prefix matches the requests URI) serves an HAproxy compatible stats page.
Currently only its CSV output is implemented.

=item B<director.cache> (enabled: bool = true)

Main function, defining whether or not the generated backend response may be cached inside B<x0d> or not.
Caching though can still be disabled/enabled on cluster-level via the JSON API, which is evaluated before the
request-local test.

Use this in order improve user experience by accelerating your backends via this central cache.

 handler myapp {
   # Serve assets directly.
   docroot '/srv/myapp/public';
   precompressed;
   staticfile;

   # Pass request to the 'myapp'-cluster.
   director.balance 'myapp';
 }

=back

=head2 dirlisting

Automatically generates a directory listing response if the
requested path (its physical target file) is a directory.

=over 6

=item B<dirlisting> ()

Responds with an automatically generated directory listing
if the current rquest points to a physical directory.

=item B<dirlisting.google> ()

Responds with an automatically generated directory listing
if the current rquest points to a physical directory.

The output is more pretty as it's using the Google API
for generating tables.

=back

=head2 userdir

This plugin adds support for accessing user's public files
in their home directories, if available.

=over 6

=item B<userdir.name> (dirname)

setup-function to define the directory name to replace with
when the request URI is to point to a user directory.

=item B<userdir> ()

handler to map the request URI to the userdir's
physical directory.

The following example maps the request URI C</~trapni/welcome.html>
to C</home/trapni/public_html/welcome.html>:

 handler setup {
     # ...
     userdir.name 'public_html';
 }

 handler main {
     # ...
     userdir;
 }

=back

=head2 expire

Adds "Expires" and "Cache-Control" response headers

=over 6

=item B<expire> (value: int)

This function adds "Expires" and "Cache-Control" headers,
based on the given paramter B<value>, to the response.

If B<value> is a timespan, then the expiration
is set relative to now.

Otherwise (if B<value> is an absolute date-time),
an absolute expiration is set.

Examples:

 # caches the response (client-side) entity for at up to 30 minutes 
 # ahead of the files last-modification time. 
 expire phys.mtime + 30 minutes

 # caches the response (client-side) for 30 minutes from now on.
 expire sys.now + 30 minutes

 # same as above (sys.now + 30 minutes)
 expire 30 minutes

=back

=head2 ssl

Provides support for encrypted connections (HTTPS) via SSL/TLS.

=over 6

=item B<ssl.loglevel> (value)

This setup-function Defines the SSL loglevel of the (B<GnuTLS>) backend library.
Values may range between 0 (no logging) to 9 (full logging).

An example use looks as follows:

 handler setup {
     # ...
     ssl.loglevel 6;
 }

=item B<ssl.listen> (address: IP = 0.0.0.0, port: int, backlog: int = 128, multi_accept: int = 1, defer_accept: bool = false; reuse_port: bool = false)

This setup-function creates an HTTPS listener.
Incoming connections will be SSL-encrypted.
You will also need at least once certificate context.

An example use looks as follows:

 handler setup {
     # ...
     ssl.listen port: 443;
 }

=item B<ssl.context> (keyfile: string, crtfile: string, trustfile: string = "", priorities: string = "")

This setup-function defines a certificate context.
A certificate context must at least provide a B<keyfile> and
a matching B<crtfile> (certificate file).

The certificate file must contain at lesat one domain name
either via Command-Name attribute or via the WWW Domain-Name extension.

The B<x0>-server then will try to select the right context
via the B<SNI> (Server Name Indication) protocol extension, which
should be supported by any modern browser except any browser on Windows XP.

An example use looks as follows:

 handler setup {
     # ...
     ssl.context keyfile: '/etc/certs/xzero.io.key',
                 crtfile: '/etc/certs/xzero.io.crt',
                 priorities: 'NONE:+VERS-TLS1.0:+ARCFOUR-128:+RSA:+SHA1:+COMP-NULL';
 }

In order to mitigate the SSL/TLS cipher suite vulnerability (CVE-2009-3555)
please do not use any CBC ciphers but for example:

     NONE:+VERS-TLS1.0:+ARCFOUR-128:+RSA:+SHA1:+COMP-NULL

=item B<ssl.allow_renegotiation> (boolean)

Allows or prevents SSL session renegotiation and is now disabled by default.
Do only allow SSL renegotiation in trusted environments.

=back

=head1 IDN - INTERNATIONALIZED DOMAIN NAMES

Making B<x0d> IDN-ready is totally up to the system administrator,
as server applications, ideally, do not need to care anything about IDN at all.

To configure an IDN-enabled virtual host, all you need to do, is, to
use the right encoding for the domain name.

A IDN name can be generated with the B<idn> command line tool of the B<libidn> project.
You can use this tool as follows:

 # idn -e -- "häßlich"
 hlich-lqa8a
 #

A very abstract example would look like this:
added a hint on how to convert IDN names

 handler main {
     match req.host {
       on 'www.xn--hsslich-lqa8a.de' { my_idnish_hp; }
       else { }
     }
 }

 # vhost handler for the IDN domain above
 handler my_idnish_hp {
     docroot '/srv/www/my_idnish_hp/htdocs';
     staticfile;
 }

=head1 BUGS

Whilst I do not know of anything critical (they get fixed by the time I find them),
this software is under active development and though
still considered B<experimental>. Please provide feedback.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<x0d> (daemon, core framework, and plugins) is written by Christian Parpart <christian@parpart.family>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<x0d(8)>, L<flow(7)>, L<spawn-fcgi(1)>, L<idn(1)>

L<http://redmine.trapni.de/projects/x0>, x0 project management page

L<http://mct.verisign-grs.com/conversiontool>, IDN conversion tool
